PAGE 1
Cultural Dissemination: An
Agent-Based Model with Social
Influence
Ngan Nguyen1, Hongfei Chen1, Benjamin Jin1, Walker
Quinn1, Conrad Tyler1, Adam Landsberg1
1W. M. Keck Science Department Claremont McKenna College, Pitzer College, Scripps
College Claremont, CA 91711, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to alandsberg@kecksci.claremont.edu
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 24(4) 5, 2021
Doi: 10.18564/jasss.4633 Url: http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.html
Received: 06-10-2020 Accepted: 24-07-2021 Published: 31-10-2021
Abstract: We study cultural dissemination in the context of an Axelrod-like agent-based model describing the
spread of cultural traits across a society, with an added element of social influence. This modification produces
absorbing states exhibiting greater variation in number and size of distinct cultural regions compared to the
original Axelrod model, and we identify the mechanism responsible for this amplification in heterogeneity. We
develop several new metrics to quantitatively characterize the heterogeneity and geometric qualities of these
absorbing states. Additionally, we examine the dynamical approach to absorbing states in both our Social In-
fluence Model as well as the Axelrod Model, which not only yields interesting insights into the diﬀerences in
behavior of the two models over time, but also provides a more comprehensive view into the behavior of Axel-
rod’s original model. The quantitative metrics introduced in this paper have broad potential applicability across
a large variety of agent-based cultural dissemination models.
Keywords: Cultural Dissemination, Agent-Based Modeling, Cultural Evolution, Opinion Dynamics, Cultural Trans-
mission, Bounded Confidence Models
Introduction
1.1One of the hallmarks of human society is the tendency for ideas, opinions, and cultures to spread from person
to person, so-called “cultural dissemination. ” This field of study has attracted many scientists interested in the
mechanism of social evolution and cultural propagation, and has broad applications to state formation (An-
derson 1991; Ballas et al. 2005), succession conflicts (Kohler et al. 2000), transitional integration (Axelrod 2006;
Heppenstall et al. 2006), domestic cleavages (Axelrod & Bennett 1993; Barros 2012), etc. In a seminal paper, Ax-
elrod (1997) examined the spread of culture using an agent-based model (Schelling 1971) built on the twin ideas
of homophily, the tendency for people to interact with those more similar to themselves, and cultural assimi-
lation, the idea that interactions cause people to become more similar (Axelrod 1997). These two ingredients
were generally expected by social scientists to generate a self-reinforcing dynamics leading to a global conver-
gence to a single culture. Instead, the model predicts in some cases the persistence of diversity (Castellano et al.
2009).
1.2In the Axelrod model, agents were placed on the vertices of a two-dimensional grid, and their cultural profile
was expressed as a list of F features, which could be thought of as socially malleable cultural characteristics
such as religious beliefs, language, or fashion preferences. For each feature f , an agent has a particular trait
valueq represented by an integer value from 0 toQ−1. For example, for the cultural feature language, some of
the possible traits for that feature might include Mandarin (q = 0), Spanish (q = 1), English (q = 2), etc. Thus,
assumingF features andQ traits, the state of each agenti would be represented as a vector:
⃗ σi = (σ1
i,σ 2
i,...,σ f
i,...,σ F
i ) (1)
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 2
where
σf
i ∈ [0,Q− 1] for allf∈ [1, 2,...,F ] (2)
1.3Agents in the Axelrod Model interact probabilistically with neighboring agents on the grid based on their degree
of similarity. Here, a “neighbor” of a given agent is defined as any agent located one unit step away from the
chosen agent (see Figure 1), and the similarity of two agents is based on the fraction of traits the two agents
share.
Figure 1: Each agent is represented by a square in a grid. The yellow squares are one-step neighbors of the agent
represented by the black square. This definition of neighbors is referred to as the von Neumann neighborhood
of radiusR = 1 under the Manhattan (taxicab) distance (Toﬀoli & Margolus 1987)
1.4At the start of the simulation each agent is assigned an initial set of random trait values. The cultural states of the
agents are updated as follows: First an agent is selected at random along with one of its neighbors; this selection
process is referred to as an “event. ” The probabilityPi,j that this selected pair (agenti and its neighbor, agent
j) will then interact is computed from their degree of cultural overlapli,j, defined as
li,j =
F∑
f =1
δσf
i,σf
j
(3)
whereδσf
i,σf
j
denotes the Kronecker delta function (defined asδx,y = 1 ifx =y and 0 ifx̸=y). The probability
of interaction is given by
Pi,j = li,j
F . (4)
1.5Observe that this probabilistic rule implements the idea of homophily, wherein two neighboring agents are
more likely to interact the more similar they are. Note that if two agents share no features (i.e.,σf
i ̸=σf
j ∀f∈
[1...,F ]), then they have zero probability of interacting. When a pair of agents do interact, they will become
more culturally similar, as follows: a random un-shared feature is selected and the chosen agent will change
its trait value (for that feature) to that of its neighbor. This interaction rule implements the notion of cultural
assimilation.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 3
1.6These simple dynamical rules lead to some interesting behaviors. Most notably, the twin influences of ho-
mophily and assimilation do not always lead to a purely homogeneous state (a mono-culture), but rather the
agents can settle down into a final configuration characterized by several distinct cultural regions on the grid,
wherein all agents within a given region are completely identical to one another, but share no common traits
with agents in bordering regions. At this stage no further agent-agent interactions are possible and the system
remains frozen in this final configuration known as an “absorbing state. "
1.7Axelrod’s simple model of cultural dissemination demonstrating that homophily and assimilation can yield het-
erogeneous societies has since been extended and generalized. For instance, the eﬀect of a “mass media” agent
was studied by Shibanai et al. (2001); see also Daley & Kendall (1964); Peres & Fontanari (2012); Rodríguez et al.
(2009). The eﬀect of noise, or “cultural dri/f_t" in the form of random perturbations of cultural features (Gandica
et al. 2013; Klemm et al. 2003; Parisi et al. 2003), the interaction via complex networks rather than a grid (Reia
& Fontanari 2016; Pfau et al. 2013), and the eﬀect of increasing the neighborhood size (Stivala & Keeler 2016)
have also been investigated. One interesting class of extensions of Axelrod’s original model which has received
some attention to date, and which is the subject of this paper, involves incorporating the eﬀects of social in-
fluence from all neighbors in an agent’s local neighborhood (i.e., “social influence models"). In particular, in
the classic Axelrod Model, during each interaction an agent will only directly compare itself to a single selected
neighbor before potentially assimilating (so-called ‘one-to-one’ communication); in this case, the presence of
the agent’s other equidistant neighbors has no immediate eﬀect. In contrast, social influence models directly
incorporate the eﬀects of these other neighbors (i.e., ‘many-to-one’ communication) in an attempt to capture
various aspects of local social dynamics.
1.8Indeed, a variety of models exploring alternative communication schemes diﬀering from that of Axelrod have
been proposed (see, e.g., Parisi et al. 2003; Flache & Macy 2011). Seminal works on opinion dynamics/bounded
confidence models by Hegselmann & Krause (2002) and Deﬀuant et al. (2000), for instance, take diﬀerent ap-
proaches to many-to-one and one-to-one communication. Related issues are also addressed in social influence
models described by Abelson (1964) and Friedkin & Johnsen (2011). And in more recent work by Keijzer (2018),
a one-to-many communication scheme is explored in the context of online social networks, wherein a single
online agent can potentially influence large numbers of other agents.
1.9In what follows we first provide some general background on social influence models of cultural dissemination
and introduce the main variant that is the focus of this paper (Section 2). In Section 3 we describe our main
numerical findings and associated analysis. In Section 4 we introduce several new metrics for describing the
nature of the absorbing state found in these models. These measures constitute potentially important new
tools for the general study of agent-based cultural dissemination models, and their utility is not limited to the
particular class of social influence models studied here.
Social Influence Model
Background
2.1Kuperman (2006) has previously introduced several Axelrod-like models of cultural dissemination which incor-
porate a form of social influence factor (referred to by Kuperman as “cultural aﬀinity”) similar in spirit to that
which will be considered here. In one such model studied by Kuperman, during an interaction the selected
agent will compare a randomly selected feature with that of its chosen neighbor, but rather than automatically
changing its trait value for that feature to match that of its neighbor it will first survey its entire local neigh-
borhood and will only change its trait value if doing so would increase the total number of matches the agent
has with its neighbors on the given feature. If changing the trait value would result in fewer total matches with
neighbors, no switch is done. In cases of a tie the agent would change its trait value with probability 0.5. As
will be described shortly, our model of social influence is similar but avoids a hard cut-oﬀ in the trait-switching
rule by employing instead a probabilistic trait-switching rule which allows for more malleability in its represen-
tation of everyday social interactions. Kuperman (2006) also introduced a second social influence-type model
in which an agent does the same evaluation as in the first, but rather than just examining the neighbors for the
selected feature, the agent looks at the overall overlap forall features in determining whether to switch the trait
for the selected feature. Again, this model utilizes a hard cut-oﬀ, majority rule for trait assimilation rather than
the more fluid, probabilistic trait-switching rule that we will consider. We do note, however, that one (analyt-
ical) advantage of Kuperman’s hard cut-oﬀ rule is that it allows for the introduction of a Lyapunov function to
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 4
determine local stability at a given time step, without having to wait for the numerical model to reach a final
absorbing state as Axelrod did.
2.2Flache & Macy (2011) also analyzed a cultural dissemination model involving social influence. In this model, an
agent is randomly selected and then will interact with some to all of its neighbors based on homophily, wherein
the agent decides whether or not to interact based on the proportion of all features that are shared by the agent
and its neighbor. (In this model, there is also probabilityr
′
that the decision to interact will be reversed.) A/f_ter
the agent chooses the neighbors to interact with, these neighbors are gathered in an influential set S and the
agent chooses randomly one of its features which is diﬀerent from at least one of the neighbors in the setS. The
agent will then adopt a new trait value so that a/f_ter adoption, the new trait is dominant in setS. However, if
there is more than one trait that satisfies the above rule, the agent will randomly select one from among these
traits. Flache & Macy (2011) find that this form of social influence helps to maintain a diversity of cultures and
in fact produces more culturally distinct regions as the grid size is increased, in contrast to Axelrod’s original
model where increasing grid size decreases cultural diversity and leads to a more mono-cultural state.
A probabilistic social influence model
2.3The analysis of social influence studied in this work diﬀers from the influential earlier works of Kuperman (2006)
and Flache & Macy (2011) in two important respects. First, the interaction rules considered in our model have
an intrinsic probabilistic component (based on a certain weighting of the agent’s local neighborhood) that ren-
ders agent-interaction outcomes less rigid compared to prior models employing deterministic rules with hard
cutoﬀs and fixed outcomes. Secondly, unlike those previous works, our analysis is highly focused on quanti-
fying the degree of cultural heterogeneity in a social influence network once it settles into an absorbing state,
and thus should be viewed as complementary to those other works. Importantly, we introduce a number of new
metrics for assessing the heterogeneity and related geometric aspects of the absorbing states which have broad
applicability. Our model also retains the original simplicity of Axelrod Model in that during any interaction an
agent will still only be able to switch its trait value for a specific feature to that of its selected neighbor, unlike
the more complicated scenario examined by Flache & Macy (2011) which considers a “modal” trait from a group
of neighbors and also incorporates the possibility of reversing an interaction. This simplicity yields some new
insights into the eﬀects of social influence in such models, including the underlying dynamical mechanisms
responsible for the system’s behaviors.
2.4We construct our Social Influence Model by introducing one extra step into the dynamical update rules used
in the original Axelrod Model. Just as before, we start by assuming a randomly selected agent i and one of its
neighbors (agentj) will interact with probability given by Equation 4, thereby incorporating homophily into the
model. Assuming the pair do interact, a random unshared featuref is then selected (i.e., a feature for which the
two agents have diﬀerent associated trait values). The new social influence component now comes into play as
follows: Rather than agent i automatically switching its trait value to match that of its selected neighbor (i.e.,
σf
i → σf
j ) as in the original Axelrod Model, instead agenti first surveys its local neighborhood to probabilisti-
cally assess how favorable such a switch would be. In particular, the agent will be less inclined to switch its trait
to that of the selected neighbor agentj if doing so would lower agenti’s overall concordance on that trait with
all of its other neighbors. More precisely, letNi denote the local neighborhood of agenti, which is defined here
to include agenti’s four nearest neighbors (see Figure 1)plus agenti itself. Agenti surveys its neighborhood and
counts the total number of its neighbors that share its trait valueσf
i . We refer to this number as the occurrence
Oi(σf
i ) of traitσf
i , defined as:
Oi(σf
i ) =
∑
n∈Ni
δσf
n, σf
i
, (5)
where againδx,y signifies a Kronecker delta function. Agenti also counts up the total number of its neighbors
that share agentj’s trait valueσf
j ; the occurrence of traitσf
j , denotedOi(σf
j ), is given :
Oi(σf
j ) =
∑
n∈Ni
δσf
n, σf
j
. (6)
The probabilityQf
i,j that agenti will switch its trait value for feature f (i.e.,σf
i → σf
j ) is determined by the
relative number of occurrences of each trait in the agent’s local neighborhood, namely:
Qf
i,j =
Oi(σf
j )
Oi(σf
i ) +Oi(σf
j )
. (7)
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 5
The basic idea behind the switching probability Qf
i,j is that, owing to local social influence, if a person is sur-
rounded by many people who think like them on a particular issue, they would be less likely to assimilate to
a new viewpoint when interacting with someone holding that diﬀerent view. Likewise, a person holding an
outlier view not shared by most of their local neighbors may be more amenable to switching.
2.5To further clarify the eﬀects of social influence, we highlight here some aspects of the switching probability
described by Equation 7. As a reminder, we reiterate that in the local trait occurrence counts (Equations 5 and
6) defined above, the summations are over agenti’s entire neighborhoodNi, which by definition includes not
only agenti’s four nearest neighbors but also agenti itself. So, for example, in the extreme case where agenti
and all of its neighbors except agentj share the same trait for the given featuref , then the switching probability
is relatively low, namely 1
5 (i.e., agenti is unlikely to change its trait since it is already in harmony with most
agents in its local neighborhood). On the opposite extreme, consider an agent who is entirely surrounded by
neighbors whom all share a common trait value which diﬀers from that of agenti itself. In this case, the agent
is in the minority and the switching probability becomes quite large, namely 4
5 , indicating that the agent has a
high chance of assimilating. Note here, however, that the model allows for some degree of “stubbornness, ” or
perhaps “free will, ” since an outlier agent can still potentially retain its minority trait despite the homogeneity
of its local neighbors.
2.6To summarize, in our Social Influence Model there is an event (i.e., the random selection of an agenti and one
of its neighbors j), an interaction probability Pi,j (determining if selected agents i andj will interact), and,
when an interaction does occur, a switching probabilityQf
i,j (determining if agenti will switch its trait value for
featuref to that of agentj). The switching probability incorporates the social influence of other agents in the
given agent’s local neighborhood.
Results and Discussions
3.1In this section, we present our major observations and discuss the implications of the added social influence
factor compared to the original Axelrod Model. Our focus is on the level of cultural heterogeneity/homogeneity
produced once the system settles into a final absorbing state. This yields not only a better understanding of the
role of social influence in cultural dissemination, but also provides some deeper insights into Axelrod’s original
model.
3.2For the ensuing discussion of heterogeneity/homogeneity, we first introduce some basic terminology 1. As the
agents on the lattice interact and evolve, distinct cultural regions can develop. Here, a “cultural region” denotes
a group of adjacent, culturally identical agents which share all the same traits as one another at some moment
in time. Cultural regions are generally somewhat fluid – they can morph and even dissolve owing to ongoing
interactions between the agents just inside the cultural region and the neighboring agents just outside the re-
gion. A slightly stronger concept is that of a “cultural zone, ” which is a cultural region of identical agents with
the added property that the agents inside the zone have no traits in common whatsoever with agents that lie
just outside the zone’s border. This means that no direct interactions can occur between the agents just inside
and just outside the zone boundary since they share no common traits (see Equation 4). Hence cultural zones
tend to be more stable structures than cultural regions. Note, however, that this does not mean that once a zone
forms it will remain intact throughout all time. Indeed, cultural zones can themselves evolve and even dissolve.
This is because outside agents which are not part of a cultural zone are continuing to update and change their
trait values, and eventually some of the agents which lie just outside the zone boundary (and which formerly
had no traits in common with the agents inside the zone) now might share some common traits with them – in
other words, the cultural zone has now gone back to being a cultural region in which the agents on either side
of the region’s border can interact and evolve owing to the presence of these common shared traits. Finally,
we note that once the entire system eventually settles down into its fixed, final configuration (the “absorbing
state”), all further spatiotemporal evolution ceases and the system essentially “freezes” into a set of distinct,
static, cultural zones. We refer to these as “frozen zones. ” This is the asymptotic behavior that we will primarily
focus on; however, as we will show, to understand this asymptotic behavior it is necessary to also understand
the dynamical processes (i.e., the formation, dissolution, and evolution of cultural regions and zones) leading
up to the absorbing state.
Amplification of heterogeneity
3.3Our first finding, illustrated in Table 1, concerns the number of distinct zones in the absorbing states. Data de-
rived from 100 runs of both the Social Influence Model and the Axelrod Model on a30×30 grid, with five features
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 6
(F = 5) and ten traits per feature (Q = 10), shows that the Social Influence Model has many more frozen zones
compared to the corresponding Axelrod Model at those same parameter values.
Social Influence Model Axelrod Model
Average number of frozen zones 8.0± 0.31.34± 0.06
Average number of events 23,534,0007,413,000
Average number of interactions 376,2001,821,000
Table 1: Data from 100 runs of both models with the grid size of30× 30. Five features with ten traits per feature
were used; the simulations were run until an absorbing state was reached. Note the significant increase in
the number of frozen cultural zones with the inclusion of the social influence factor. Here, “event” refers to a
selection of an agent and one of its neighbors, and an “interaction” refers to an exchange of traits between the
selected pair.
3.4The numerically observed amplification of heterogeneity (i.e., increase in the number of frozen zones) under so-
cial influence compared to the Axelrod Model holds for a broad spectrum of diﬀerent parameter choices(F,Q ),
as illustrated in Table 2. As is seen, direct comparison of the two models at thesame parameter values shows
that the inclusion of the social influence factor increases heterogeneity compared to the Axelrod Model. We
seek to elucidate the dynamical mechanisms underlying this eﬀect.
# of Frozen Zones
Social Influence Axelrod
(F,Q) = (5,5)1.11
(5,10)8 1.34
(5,15)5910
(10,5)1 1
(10,10)1.121
(10,15)2.11.04
Table 2: Data from 50 runs of both Social Influence and Axelrod models with the grid size of30×30 for diﬀerent
pairs of feature and trait values; the simulations were run until an absorbing state was reached. Note in partic-
ular that the number of frozen zones at any given set of parameter values (F,Q ) is consistently higher in the
Social Influence Model than in the corresponding Axelrod Model (except for situations in which both models
exhibit a single mono-culture).
3.5In broad intuitive terms, the increase in overall heterogeneity might seemingly arise in part because, under the
action of social influence, the borders of a cultural region tend to be less susceptible to infiltration by outside,
neighboring agents. Consider, for instance, an agent just inside the border of a cultural region, and focus on
some particular feature f with trait value q. This agent shares this same trait value with all its neighboring
agents inside its cultural region. Thus, when that agent interacts with a neighbor with a diﬀerent trait value q′
residing just outside the cultural region, under the Social Influence Model the agent has only a low probability
of switching its trait valueQf
i,j << 1 compared to Axelrod-like models where, in eﬀect,Qf
i,j = 1. Thus, without
social influence, boundaries between cultural regions tend to be more vulnerable to the introduction of new
traits, and the resulting dissolution of borders increases the likelihood that the final absorbing state will be
relatively homogeneous, or perhaps even mono-cultural. However, this simplistic description is insuﬀicient.
The actual dynamical portrait is more nuanced, and it is necessary to examine more deeply the underlying
mechanisms and processes by which distinct cultural regions and zones can form and evolve. In what follows
we isolate and adjust various parameters of the models to better understand these mechanisms responsible for
the increase in heterogeneity. Our work enjoys certain parallels with the important earlier findings of Flache &
Macy (2011) on the eﬀects of social influence. Although the Social Influence Model studied here (and our focus on
the properties of the absorbing state) diﬀers from that of Flache & Macy (2011) in multiple respects (e.g., the latter
incorporates selection error, “modal” traits, cultural perturbations, and a diﬀerent social interaction scheme),
nonetheless we will observe a qualitative harmony between the two models, which speaks to the robustness
of the underlying mechanisms responsible for the amplification of heterogeneity under social influence.
3.6Before proceeding, we remark that some additional preliminary insight into the amplification of heterogene-
ity under social influence can be obtained by performing a type of sensitivity analysis, wherein one smoothly
transitions between the Social Influence Model and the original Axelrod Model. Recall that the key diﬀerence
between the two models is that in the former there is a socially derived switching probabilityQf
i,j (see Equation
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 7
7) that is determined by how well a given agent “fits” with its local neighbors, whereas in the Axelrod model the
eﬀective switching probability is essentially unity. By introducing an auxiliary parameter α which varies be-
tween 0 and 1, we can define a modified switching probabilityWf
i,j via:
Wf
i,j = (1−α)Qf
i,j +α. (8)
Observe that settingα = 0 corresponds precisely to the Social Influence Model, while settingα = 1 reproduces
the Axelrod Model. By varyingα we can smoothly transition between the two models. As an illustration, Figure
2 shows the fraction of the lattice taken up by largest frozen zone as a function ofα; the increase in homogeneity
withα (i.e., as one moves towards the Axelrod Model) is clearly seen.
Figure 2: Fraction of lattice taken up by largest frozen zone versusα, withα = 0 (Social Influence Model) and
α = 1 (Axelrod Model). 100 trials were conducted for each value ofα. All trials were conducted on a 30×30 grid
withF = 5 features andQ = 10 trait values, until an absorbing state was reached.
3.7In what follows we conduct a detailed examination of various facets of the Social Influence Model to better
understand the eﬀects of social influence on cultural assimilation, and identify and analyze the underlying dy-
namical mechanisms responsible for the behaviors seen.
Heterogeneity and lattice size
3.8One intriguing and relevant observation from the original Axelrod Model is its behavior over varying grid sizes.
As one can see in Figure 3, as grid size increases, the average number of frozen cultural zones in the Axelrod
Model initially increases, but as the grid size surpasses 6× 6 the number of frozen zones begins to decrease
and eventually a mono-cultural state reigns, in which the majority of trials result in an absorbing state that is
completely homogeneous. In contrast, in the Social Influence Model – at those same parameter values F,Q –
the number of frozen zones continues to increase (somewhat linearly) with grid size. This qualitative distinc-
tion between the observed behaviors of the two models is surprising because the underlying diﬀerences in the
agent-agent interaction rules between the Axelrod Model and the Social Influence Model may appear to be rela-
tively modest. Recall that the only modification made by the Social Influence Model is the inclusion of a simple
switching probabilityQf
i,j < 1 which takes into account an agent’s cultural aﬀinity with its local neighbors, un-
like the Axelrod Model. An analysis (below) of the underlying processes governing the formation and growth of
distinct cultural zones will help to clarify the distinctions that emerge in the behaviors of the two models under
the same parameter valuesF,Q , and ultimately help elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the amplifica-
tion of heterogeneity under social influence. We note that the behavior displayed in Figure 3 also occurs at other
parameter values(F,Q ); see, for instance, Figure 21 in Appendix F which is taken at(F,Q ) = (7, 15). Moreover,
as an additional point of comparison, we also constructed a diﬀerent social influence model (in Appendix E)
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 8
- a stripped down version of an earlier social influence model by Flache & Macy (2011) - and observe a similar
increase in heterogeneity with lattice size, which suggests certain universal dynamical eﬀects are at play.
3.9Before delving into these causes, we briefly remark here that, from the interesting work of Castellano et al.
(2000, 2009)(see also Klemm et al. 2003), we know that in the original Axelrod Model the choice of simulation
parameterF = 5 lies on the “order” side of a non-equilibrium, order-disorder phase transition, in contrast to
what we observe (for the same parameter choice) in our Social Influence Model. While the issue of the existence
and nature of phase transitions in such models is quite interesting and discussed further in Appendix C, it re-
mains somewhat outside the central focus of this paper. Instead, for purposes of understanding amplification
of heterogeneity under social influence compared to the Axelrod Model (as seen in Table 2 and Figure 3), we
concentrate on a detailed examination of the dynamical processes underlying zone formation in these models.
Figure 3: Number of frozen cultural zones versus lattice size (wherelatticesize = (width)2). 100 trials were
conducted for each lattice width from 2 to 22; 50 trials each for lattice widths from 24 to 40; 20 trials for each
width from 50 to 100; and 10 trials for lattice width 120. All trials were conducted withF = 5 features and
Q = 10 trait values, until an absorbing state was reached.
3.10In his original paper, Axelrod lays out two general mechanisms that govern the system’s behaviors at diﬀer-
ent grid sizes, and we will analyze these mechanisms in both the Axelrod Model and Social Influence Model.
The first mechanism, which we will refer to as a “multiplicity eﬀect, ” is fairly straightforward. The multiplicity
eﬀect reflects the observation that the number of possible frozen cultural zones increases with grid size ow-
ing to the presence of more agents (i.e., borrowing language from statistical mechanics, more microstates are
possible with larger lattices). This explains the initial growth seen in Figure 3 in the number of frozen zones
for the Axelrod Model. But there is a second competing eﬀect at play in the Axelrod Model which tends to
favor homogeneity at large lattice sizes. This second mechanism, which we will call “the dominant-regions
eﬀect” is more complicated. Generally, this eﬀect states that, given two similar regions that can interact, dur-
ing their subsequent dynamical evolution the larger region is more likely to completely eliminate the smaller
region than vice versa, leaving just a single cultural region. As Axelrod (1997) explains, this process can be
understood as follows: Imagine a simplified model with 10 agents in total, lined up along a one-dimensional
lattice. Suppose these agents have two cultural features, each with two possible trait values, 0 and 1. Next
imagine that, at the start of the simulation, the grid is divided into two cultural regions, where all agents on
the le/f_t half of the grid are in cultural state [0, 0] while those on the right half are in state [0, 1], as shown:
[0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1]. Any change to the current configuration of the system
will be initiated by the two center agents on the boundary separating the two cultural regions. These two agents
have an equal probability of being selected and having their cultural vector changed to that of the other agent,
leaving two possible outcomes, namely
[0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1](9)
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 9
or
[0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,0] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1] [0,1](10)
3.11Depending on the agent selected, one cultural region will grow and the other will shrink. The system will con-
tinue to evolve in this manner until one region completely absorbs the other and no further interaction is pos-
sible. Since only one pair of agents can interact at a time, and since they have an equal probability of being
changed, the entire scenario can be eﬀectively modeled as a random walk. In the scenario described above,
both regions initially started with five agents, and thus either region is equally likely to absorb the other. How-
ever, if the initial sizes of the cultural regions were diﬀerent, then the probability of the larger region absorbing
the smaller one would be higher because the larger region would have a shorter random walk. This means that
the probability of a region absorbing another region varies directly with size. Although the above illustration
of the dominant-regions eﬀect was for a very simple one-dimensional version of the Axelrod model, the same
basic premise could presumably hold for more complex, higher-dimensional models.
3.12As a test of this idea, we conducted 1,000 trials of both the Axelrod Model and the Social Influence Model on the
(2-dimensional) lattice of agent states shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Le/f_t: An initial configuration with one large cultural region and several small regions which each share
only one common trait with the dominant region. Right: The most typical final configuration seen when the
system settles into the absorbing state.
3.13Note that this starting lattice (on the le/f_t of the figure) has one large dominant cultural region and five smaller
regions that each share only one trait with the dominant region. The simulations reveal that once the system
reached a final absorbing configuration, the result was a mono-culture in a large majority of the runs. Specif-
ically, the simulations resulted in a mono-culture in 75% of the runs for the Axelrod Model and in 90% of the
runs for the Social Influence Model. This indicates that the dominant-regions eﬀect is at work in both models
(and appears in fact to be modestly stronger in the Social Influence Model). This eﬀect helps to explain the de-
cline in the overall level of heterogeneity seen in the Axelrod model, since larger grids facilitate larger cultural
regions, and by the dominant-regions eﬀect these larger regions will absorb the smaller regions around them,
becoming even more dominant as they grow, thereby creating a positive feedback loop that typically results
in a final, mono-cultural absorbing state. In short, for the Axelrod model we see that the multiplicity eﬀect fa-
voring heterogeneity wins out over the dominant-regions eﬀect for small lattice sizes, but for large lattice sizes
the dominant-region eﬀects favoring homogeneity begins to predominate (Figure 3). However, this explanation
seems to fail for the Social Influence Model and in fact presents a paradox: Given that the dominant-regions ef-
fect is in fact moderately stronger in the Social Influence Model than the Axelrod model, why does the number
of frozen zones in the Social Influence Model continue to increase with region size (Figure 3)?
3.14To resolve this seeming paradox, we must examine more closely the cultural profile of the final mono-culture
and the underlying processes that led to it. The first key observation is that the cultural profile of the mono-
culture in the final absorbing state is not necessarily the same as the cultural profile of the initial dominant
region. As a dominant region absorbs the surrounding regions, it can sometimes adapt, taking traits from the
smaller regions before subsuming them. This occurred more frequently in the Axelrod Model than the Social In-
fluence Model (e.g., data associated with Figure 4 reveals that when a mono-culture formed, the final absorbing
state diﬀered from the initial dominant region in about 63% of trials for the Axelrod Model but only in about 9%
of trials for the Social Influence Model). The reduced probability of trait exchange in the Social Influence Model
(owing toQf
i,j < 1) significantly increased the overall resistance of large cultural regions from changing as a
whole. This aspect of the Social Influence Model provides a clue in explaining its behavior, as we now describe.
3.15To start, recall that a cultural region is a group of adjacent, culturally identical agents bordered by agents pos-
sessing a somewhat diﬀerent (but still overlapping) trait profile, whereas a cultural zone is a special case of a
cultural region in which the agents immediately outside the region’s border haveno traits in common with the
agents inside the region. Accordingly, the agents inside a zone cannot directly interact with agents just outside
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 10
the border. Hence zone borders, though they can change over time, tend to be more structurally stable than
regional borders. And it remains true that, by the dominant-regions eﬀect, large zones, if they remain intact,
tend to absorb smaller regions over time.
3.16Now consider the initial cultural matrix shown on the le/f_t in Figure 5. It is composed of a dominant region (in
black), two smaller regions (orange and green), and a zone (in red).
Figure 5: Le/f_t: A starting cultural matrix. The agents in black (with cultural trait profile [1 4 3 4 0]) form a large,
dominant region. The agents in orange ([0 4 6 5 4]) and green ([9 6 3 8 5]) form two smaller regions, and the
agents in red ([0 2 6 3 2]) constitute a zone. Right: The most typical final configuration (i.e., absorbing state) that
results provided the red zone survives.
3.17Focus on the behavior of the red zone. Although agents in the red zone are initially completely dissimilar to
the agents that border them and hence cannot directly interact with them, it is still possible for the red zone to
change over time and potentially be absorbed by the dominant region. To see how this can come about, note
that while the red region has no traits in common with the bordering black and green regions, it does share two
traits in common with the faraway orange region. And note moreover that the orange and green regions each
have a trait in common with the black region and hence can exchange traits with it. Therefore, it is possible
for an orange-region trait (for example, the middle “6” in [04654]) to partially infiltrate into the black region
and subsequently begin interacting with agents in the red zone, which previously was not possible. Likewise,
trait propagation is also possible via orange→ black→ green→ red. In this manner the initial red zone need
not always remain intact and in fact could ultimately be absorbed. In 10,000 simulations of the Axelrod model
(with initial cultural matrix shown in Figure 5, le/f_t), the model produced a mono-culture in 68% of the runs;
19% of runs resulted in the dominant (black) region maintaining its original profile, meaning that it did not
pick up any traits from the orange [04654] region or green [96385] region when they were assimilated. The
original red zone ultimately disappeared via interactions with outside agents in about 70% of the Axelrod runs
(via the intermediary action of the black agents assimilating the traits from the orange region, i.e., through the
middle “6”). In contrast, in the Social Interaction Model, the red zone proved much more robust, and a mono-
culture was produced in only 38% of the runs. In 59% of the runs the dominant (black) region maintained
its original cultural profile (i.e., did not assimilate traits from the orange region it consumed). The red zone
remained unchanged in 62% of the runs, which also suggests a lack of trait assimilation.
3.18These observations help explain why the Axelrod model results in declining numbers of frozen zones with in-
creasing grid size, while in the Social Influence Model the number of zones steadily increases (Figure 3). In
both models both the multiplicity eﬀect (favoring heterogeneity as lattice size is increased) and the dominant-
regions eﬀect (favoring homogeneity as larger cultural regions absorb smaller cultural regions) are at work. And
indeed the the dominant-regions eﬀect is actually more pronounced in the Social Influence Model. However, in
the Social Influence Model agents within neighboring regions are far less able to spread around cultural traits
in order to break zones (even though larger regions still have a tendency to absorb smaller regions). This resis-
tance results in stronger zones, which, in combination with the multiplicity eﬀect, ultimately leads to an overall
increase in the number of frozen zones with lattice size in the Social Influence Model. Further elaboration and
additional related data is provided in the next two subsections. That said, despite this evidence we caution
that it would be premature to definitively conclude that this trend (Figure 3) is truly asymptotic, since for suf-
ficiently large lattice sizes (beyond those numerically explored here), the curve for the Social Influence Model
could ultimately turn back down owing to unanticipated nonlinear eﬀects.
Zone size distribution
3.19We next examine the distribution of the sizes of frozen cultural zones. Figure 6 shows the results a30× 30 grid
withF = 5 andQ = 10 averaged over 100 runs. In both the Axelrod Model and the Social Influence Model, the
majority of frozen zones were either very small - i.e., consisting of just one or two agents - or very large, covering
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 11
most of the lattice. But there were some important diﬀerences. The Social influence model, for instance, exhib-
ited on average 3.8 single-agent zones per run, compared to just 0.2 single-agent zones for the Axelrod Model.
This can be understood as follows. Due to the exceedingly large number of possible feature/trait combinations
for an agent (FQ), during the initial random setup of the individual agents’ cultural profiles, the probability that
a given agent will have no traits in common with any of its nearest neighbors (and hence constitute a single-
agent zone) is (1− 1/Q)4≈ 0.66. As described above, zone boundaries tend to be more robust in the Social
Influence Model and less likely to be subsumed by large surrounding regions, so we would expect more single-
agent zones to have survived once the system settles into an absorbing state compared to the Axelrod Model.
Figure 6: Frozen zone sizes versus number of occurrences for the Social Influence Model (le/f_t) and Axelrod Model
(right). Data is averaged over 100 runs on a30× 30 grid with 5 features and 10 traits per feature. In the Social
Influence Model histogram, the peak on the le/f_t is associated with the appearance of small frozen zones, e.g., in
a typical run there are approximately 3.8± 0.2 single-agent zones on average.
3.20In addition, observe from Figure 6 that the Social Influence Model had much greater variety in terms of sizes
of frozen zones. For this model, small zones of size 1 and 2 were common, with about 3.8 occurrences per run
and 0.9 occurrences per run respectively, along with a single large zone of size in the high 800’s. Notably, there
were no zones of size 900 in any of the 100 runs of the Social Influence Model, i.e., no mono-cultures. A moderate
sprinkling of intermediate size zones is also seen. In contrast, in the Axelrod Model, mono-cultures appeared
in about 74% of runs, and intermediate-size zones containing between 13-885 agents were altogether absent.
As discussed previously, in the Axelrod Model, the dominant-regions eﬀect results in larger regions tending
to consume smaller regions. As a result, almost none of intermediate-size regions survive once the system
settles. On the other hand, the more resilient borders between cultural regions and zones in the Social Influence
Model makes it more likely that smaller and intermediate sized regions will survive even in the presence of the
dominant-regions eﬀect, resulting in a modest number intermediate-size zones in the absorbing state. We point
out that while our numerical data and analysis demonstrate that incorporating a social influence component
into the Axelrod Model does, rather intriguingly, produce greater cultural diversity, nonetheless we also note
that this diversity does not overwhelm and/or completely fragment the system in the parameter regimes we
are studying. For instance, while the Social Influence curve in Figure3 may superficially give the appearance
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 12
of runaway growth in cultural diversity, this is not the case. Indeed, one sees from the data that for a 30× 30
lattice with 900 agents, there are only about 8 distinct zones, and for a lattice with 14,400 agents there are only
about 22 zones, and moreover, in these cases there is typically just one very large cultural zone and the rest
tend to be relatively small. Likewise, Figure 6, while clearly illustrating the notable increase in diversity arising
from social influence, also shows that the number of single-agent zones remains rather modest (i.e., about 4
culturally isolated single-agent zones out of 900 agents). These observations are also reflected in the data in
Figure2.
Figure 7: Frozen zone size versus number of occurrences for the Social Influence Model (le/f_t) and Axelrod Model
(right), computed for 1000 runs on an8× 8 grid withF = 5 andQ = 10. This chosen grid size corresponds to
the turning point in Figure 3 in which the multiplicity eﬀect and dominant-regions eﬀect in the Axelrod model
balance.
3.21It is also interesting to briefly consider frozen-zone size distributions using a small8×8 lattice, which, as seen in
Figure 3, corresponds to the lattice size at which the average number of frozen zones in both the Social Influence
Model and Axelrod Model are nearly equal. The zone size distributions are shown in Figure 7. Notably, we find
that these distributions are highly similar, suggesting that the diﬀerences in the dominant-region eﬀects in the
two models first become manifest for grid sizes larger than8× 8.
3.22Lastly, we briefly comment here on the eﬀects ofneighborhood size on the heterogeneity of the absorbing state.
All of the preceding simulations were done assuming each agent (in the interior of the lattice) has 4 nearest
neighbors, i.e., that lie one unit away in the taxicab metric. One could instead imagine enlarging the neighbor-
hood size to 12, corresponding to neighbors which are two units away or less in the taxicab metric. As we might
anticipate based on prior work on the Axelrod Model, in the Social Influence Model we observe that increasing
the neighborhood size tends to decrease the average number of frozen zones. We also observe that while the
number of frozen zones decreases, the sizes of the smaller frozen zones tends to increase. Details on the eﬀects
of increasing neighborhood size are described in Appendix D; see in particular Figures 18 and 19.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 13
Approach to the absorbing state
3.23We next examine the dynamical progression of the system during its journey towards the final absorbing state.
Referencing Table 1, we first note that the Social Influence Model requires almost three times as many events to
reach an absorbing state, but with approximately five times fewer total interactions. For instance, for the chosen
simulation parameters, it takes the Social Influence about 23.5 million events and nearly 380,000 interactions
to reach an absorbing state while the Axelrod Model requires 7.4 million events and 1.8 million interactions.
These trends can be understood as follows: Recall that in the Axelrod Model the agents’ cultural profiles can
change more easily, and thus cultural regions and zones tend to be relatively fluid. Accordingly, the number
of interactions required for the system to finally settle into an absorbing state will be higher than in the corre-
sponding Social Interaction Model where agents and cultural boundaries tend to be more rigid. On the other
hand, each interaction in the Social Interaction Model will require more attempts (i.e., events) before it actually
occurs, since the probability that an event produces an interaction is lower (since Qf
i,j < 1) than in the Axel-
rod Model, resulting in a larger number of events for the Social Interaction Model. But we can garner a deeper
understanding of the system’s behavior by examining the evolving cultural states as they progress towards the
final absorbing state. By recording the cultural profile of the system at diﬀerent stages of its evolution 2, one
can visualize how agents form, destroy, and re-form borders over a period of time as illustrated in Figures 8
and 9. The Social Influence Model (Figure 8) tends to result in more isolated one-agent and two-agent zones
that form early on in the simulation and which remain isolated and intact all the way through to the absorbing
state. For instance, the two-agent zone in the upper-right corner of Figures 8 that appears sometime within the
first 260,000 events is able to survive, unchanged, for the nearly 10 million events that follow. Meanwhile, in
the Axelrod Model (Figure 9) one commonly sees dissolution of small zones (e.g., consider the two single-agent
zones in the upper-le/f_t corner at 340,000 events), as well as the dominant-regions eﬀect in which larger cultural
regions tend to absorb smaller ones.
Figure 8: Social Influence Model: An example evolution from an initial state to the final absorbing state for a
30× 30 lattice withF = 5,Q = 10. Black border lines indicate the agents on opposite sides have no traits in
common. Blue border lines of various shades represent between 2-4 shared traits (dark blue=4, light blue=2).
Absence of a border line between agents indicates the agents share identical cultural profiles.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 14
Figure 9: Axelrod Model: An example evolution from an initial state to the final absorbing state (for same system
parameters as in preceding figure).
3.24We next track the number of cultural states in each model over the course of their evolution to a final absorbing
state. Figure 10 shows representative examples of these evolutions. Observe that the number of cultural regions
in the Social Influence and Axelrod Model both initially decline sharply. However, the decline in Social Influence
Model tends to be steep (e.g., it declines to 200 cultural regions a/f_ter approximately 300,000 events whereas the
Axelrod Model requires over 3,000,000 events to attain this same diminution) and then curve notably flattens
for a long period. In contrast, in the Axelrod Model, a/f_ter the initial rapid descent, the decline continues in a
more moderate, relatively steady manner.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 15
Figure 10: Number of cultural regions vs. number of events for the Social Influence (orange) and Axelrod (blue)
models. Both represent typical runs on a 30× 30 grid with 5 features and 10 traits per feature.
Figure 11: Number of cultural regions vs. number of interactions for the Social Influence (orange) and Axelrod
(blue) models. Both represent typical runs on a 30× 30 grid with 5 features and 10 traits per feature.
3.25As can be seen in Figures 8 and 9, regions of identical agents tend to rapidly form relatively early in both the
Social Influence and Axelrod models. This is because, due to the random assignment of initial traits, in the very
early stages of the simulation an agent is unlikely to be surrounded by a culturally similar neighbors, so the
social influence factor does not play a big role and thus the two models behave similarly (namely, the num-
ber of cultural regions declines rapidly as smaller regions are quickly assimilated by larger regions due to the
dominant-regions eﬀect). However, in the Social Influence Model, a/f_ter this rapid reduction in the number of
regions and zones, the subsequent rate of change slows dramatically since the social-influence eﬀect is now
heightened in these remaining regions and zones as the agents harden against further change. Thus, a/f_ter
the rapid drop in cultural regions, we see a slow decline in the number of regions until the absorbing state is
reached. In contrast, the Axelrod Model exhibits a steadier, more consistent decline in cultural regions because
the absence of the social-influence factor helps the boundaries between cultural regions and zones remain
malleable and less likely to freeze in place.
3.26Lastly, we mention that as an alternative to looking at the model’s temporal evolution as a function of events (as
in Figure 10), one could instead examine it as a function of events (see Figure 11). Both events and interactions
can serve as reasonable proxies for “time, " and thus Figures 10 and 11 are qualitatively similar. The quantitative
diﬀerence in horizontal timescales in the two graphs is consistent with the numerical results of Table 1.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 16
Cultural Heterogeneity Metrics
4.1We next wish to quantitatively characterize the nature of the heterogeneity in the system, both during the course
of its dynamical evolution and a/f_ter it settles into a final absorbing state. In most previous works, as in Axelrod’s
original analysis, heterogeneity has been primarily characterized by simply counting up the total number of
distinct cultural regions and/or zones. While this serves as a very useful, basic tool, it throws away a great deal
of potentially important information about the regions and zones. For example, a lattice with three zones could
have two very small zones and one very large zone that subsumes nearly the entirety of the lattice, or instead the
lattice might have three zones all of approximately equal size. Simply counting the total number of zones will
not distinguish between these diﬀerent scenarios. Likewise, a simple count of zones provides no information
about the overall geometrical qualities of the frozen zones making up the heterogeneous absorbing state, and
in particular does not diﬀerentiate between heterogeneous states made primarily of geometrically compact
(e.g., square-shaped) frozen zones versus heterogeneous states whose frozen zones are highly filamentary in
shape and/or have very course boundaries. Such considerations motivate our desire to construct novel metrics
to quantify diﬀerent aspects of heterogeneity in cultural dissemination models. We developed the following
three measures, each capturing a unique facet of the system’s heterogeneity (aka ‘disorder’).
• Heterogeneity Metric 1 describes the relative dissimilarity of each agent on the grid to its neighbors based
on diﬀerences in trait values.
• Heterogeneity Metric 2 is an entropic-based measure taking into account both the number of regions and
their sizes.
• Heterogeneity Metric 3 measures the degree to which the frozen zones of a heterogeneous absorbing
state are geometrically elongated in shape and/or have very rough boundaries (versus being compact
and smooth).
Heterogeneity metric 1
4.2Inspired by direct comparison in adjacent agents’ profiles, Vazquez et al. (2010) developed a metric for disorder
in a binary system, where each agent either spoke language X or language Y or both X and Y:
ρ = 1
2Nl
∑
⟨i,j⟩
1−SiSj
2 (11)
whereNl is the number of links in the network and Si andSj represent the state of agent i and neighborj,
respectively. Drawing from spin models, Vazquez et al. made Si andSj either 1 or -1 depending on the state
of the agent (language X or language Y). Extending this basic idea, we developed an analogous metric for more
complex, non-binary systems such as ours, as follows:
ρ1 = 1
4N(N− 1)
N 2
∑
i=1
∑
j∈N ′
i
(
1− li,j
F
)
(12)
whereN is the width of the square lattice, which implies 2N(N− 1) is the number of edges in the network
(assuming nearest neighbor connections), N 2 is the total number of agents, li,j represents the trait overlap
between agent i and its neighbor j as defined previously in Equation 3,N
′
i denotes the agents in agent i’s
neighborhood (excluding agent i itself), and F is the number of features. Here, we are treating the square
lattice as a network, where each agent is connected by an edge to its closest neighbors (i.e., precisely those
agents with whom it can directly interact).
4.3The above metric ρ1, by design, compares each agent to each of its neighbors, and counts up the number of
features that it does not share the same trait values with. This is repeated for all agents in the lattice. The result
is then normalized, so that the resulting metric ρ1 is a number between 0 and 1 that quantifies the relative
dissimilarity of each agent on the lattice to its neighbors, with 1 representing complete disorder (i.e., no agent
shares any of the same trait values with any of its neighbors) and 0 representing complete order (i.e., every
agent has the same trait value for each feature).
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 17
Heterogeneity metric 2
4.4A second method of characterizing disorder is borrowed from statistical physics and is based on the idea of
configurational entropy (see, e.g., Jaynes 1978). In the present context of cultural dissemination models, given
the observed number and sizes of the cultural regions, we first estimate the number of possible geometrical
rearrangements of these regions on the lattice. This number of rearrangements, called the multiplicityΩ, will be
relatively small for lattices containing just a few, fairly large regions, and will be very high for lattices containing
many small regions. We then define the entropy of the system to beln(Ω), and use this as a new disorder metric
for such systems.
4.5Due to the complexity of calculating all possible lattice configurations for a given set ofM regions of sizesSi,i =
1...M , several assumptions are used to simplify the computation of Ω. First, the regions are all assumed to
be relatively square in shape 3, as seen in the upper and lower le/f_t images of Figure 12. This greatly simplifies
the problem, as re-arranging squares on a lattice is much simpler than reorienting mismatched “Tetris" pieces
(see, e.g., the upper right image of Figure 12).
Figure 12: The two lattices on the le/f_t and the one on the upper right depict absorbing states for diﬀerent runs.
The lower right image indicates how we approximate the shape of a region.
4.6Second, to account for the space in the lattice being taken up by the regions of diﬀerent sizes, we start with an
empty lattice and imagine sequentially filling it, beginning with the smallest region and moving on to progres-
sively larger regions. At each step in this iterative process, we look at the remaining space available in the lattice
and treat this remaining space as though it were a smaller, square lattice, and then compute how many config-
urations are available to the current region as we insert it into this reduced lattice. We continue in this manner
until the largest region has been inserted, at which point the full lattice is filled. The motivation for sequencing
from small to large is based on the observation that small regions are eﬀectively unconstrained in where they
can appear within the lattice - e.g., a small region can easily appear as an island within a larger region. In other
words, large regions are not eﬀective at blocking small regions (see, for instance, the lower le/f_t graph of Figure
12).
4.7Given these considerations, the metric itself is constructed as follows. Assuming that all regions of size Si are
squares with sides of length√Si (whereSi+1≥Si fori = 1...M ), that the original lattice has sizeN 2 with sides
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 18
of lengthN , and thatN 2
i denotes the amount of lattice space remaining immediately prior to the insertion of
regioni (whereN1 = N ), then, as seen in the lower right image of Figure 12, regioni can be positioned in
(Ni−√Si + 1)2 distinct ways. Note that as regions are sequentially inserted, the remaining space at each step
is (N 2
i+1 = N 2− ∑j=i
j=1Sj). Hence the total number of possible configurations forM regions of sizesSi with
i = 1,...M under the given assumptions is:
Ω =
M∏
i=1
(Ni−
√
Si + 1)2, (13)
and since entropy is ln(Ω), we therefore have:
ln(Ω) = 2
M∑
i=1
(Ni−
√
Si + 1) (14)
For convenience, we normalize this (so that its maximum possible value is 1) by dividing by the maximum pos-
sible entropy value, ln(N 2!), which occurs when every agent is dissimilar from its neighbors. We thus define
our entropic heterogeneity metric to be:
ρ2 =
2
M∑
i=1
ln(Ni−√Si + 1)
ln(N 2!) (15)
whereN 2
i+1 =N 2− ∑j=i
j=1Sj andS1≤S2≤... ≤SM .
4.8We note that metric ρ2 is particularly sensitive to the number of small regions present in the system, since
each of these can significantly increase the multiplicityΩ. This sensitivity is somewhat obscured by the natural
logarithm that appears in the entropy, and further still by the normalization factor (since most absorbing states
are nowhere near being maximally heterogeneous). Nonetheless, as a heterogeneity metric the relative size of
ρ2 is strongly influenced by the number of small regions in the system.
Heterogeneity metric 3
4.9While the previous two metrics ρ1,ρ 2 are useful for quantifying the average degree of dissimilarity between
agents and the configurational entropy associated with the number and sizes of cultural regions on the lattice,
neither provides direct information regarding the geometrical shapes of the diﬀerent regions. For instance, re-
gions or zones could potentially be elongated and filamentary in appearance with rough boundaries, or instead
perhaps relatively compact with smooth boundaries. We thus introduce a new metric to characterize this geo-
metric aspect of heterogeneity. The construction is fairly straightforward, and utilizes the fact that filamentary
regions and/or regions with suﬀiciently coarse boundaries will tend to have a high fraction of agents on their
border (relative to interior agents), whereas for compact regions with smooth boundaries this fraction will be
much smaller. We define Bi to be the number of border agents for region i; it is computed by summing up
(over all agents in regioni) the total number of external agents with whom an agent in regioni shares a border.
Note that in this counting process some external agents will be counted more than once if they happen to share
borders with multiple agents in region i. If region i with sizeSi were perfectly square in shape with smooth
boundaries and thus maximally compact, it would have 4√Si bordering agents. Thus the ratio Bi/4√Si is a
measure that reflects both the degree of elongation and the roughness of the boundaries of a region compared
to a maximally compact region of the same size. We then average this ratio over allM regions in the lattice, and
then subtract one from this average in order to measure the deviation of the regions’ geometry from perfectly
smooth, compact squares. This yields the metric
ρ3 =
(
1
M
M∑
i=1
Bi
4√Si
)
− 1, (16)
whereBi is the number of border agents, Si is the size of the region and M is the total number of regions.
Note thatρ3 = 0 if all regions are square, and becomes larger the rougher and/or more filamentary the regions
become. Note also that in the averaging process used to define ρ3 we do not weight the regions by size, but
instead employ equal weighting of all regions; were this not done a single very large (and relatively compact)
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 19
region would dominate the sum and thereby obscure significant geometric information about the shapes of the
potentially large numbers of small regions in the lattice.
4.10Lastly, we remark on some of the scaling properties of this geometrical heterogeneity metric. Consider a lattice
of sizeN×N containingM regions of various sizes and shapes. Now imagine simply enlarging the size of the
lattice along with all the regions therein (while keeping the number and the shapes of the individual regions
the same). Under this enlargement observe thatρ3 will remain unchanged, as expected, given that the overall
shapes of the regions have been maintained. However, consider instead the case in which a particular region
becomes progressively narrower (relatively speaking) as the lattice grows. For instance, consider a long rectan-
gular strand of width one that runs the length of the lattice (i.e., sizeN× 1), and suppose that asN increases
the width of this region remains one. Such a region thus becomes more and more filamentary in form as the
lattice grows. In this case, the extreme geometry of this filament will dominate the metric ρ3, and it is easy
to show that the metric will scale as ρ3∼
√
N . While we do not expect such filamentary strands which span
the entire lattice to actually arise in models of the type considered here, nonetheless this argument shows that
progressively roughening the boundary of a region will lead to a largerρ3.
Disorder/heterogeneity analysis
4.11We next use the above three heterogeneity metrics to gain deeper insights into the behaviors of the Social In-
fluence and the Axelrod models, and in particular to better understand and quantify the emergence of hetero-
geneity.
Figure 13: Heterogeneity metric valuesρ1,ρ 2 versus rescaled time (where ‘time’ , which runs from 0 to 1, is ex-
pressed as the fraction of events occurring before the absorbing state is reached) for the Social Influence Model
(le/f_t) and Axelrod Model (right). Each curve was constructed by averaging over 100 runs on an30× 30 grid.
4.12In Figure 13, we can see a clear distinction between the Social Influence and Axelrod models for the first two
disorder metrics. In the Axelrod Model (right), both disorder metrics asymptote (at time=1) very close to zero,
indicating the preponderance of a single ordered (homogeneous) absorbing state in a large fraction of the runs.
The asymptotic values ofρ1,ρ 2 for the Social Influence Model are also very close to zero, though they do remain
higher those for the Axelrod model (this small diﬀerence is somewhat obscured in the figure owing to the scale
of the graph, and the normalization used for the metrics).
4.13More interestingly, if instead we focus on the temporal evolution of these metrics rather than their asymptotic
values, we see another revealing diﬀerence between the two models. Both models show a sharp initial drop in
disorder followed by long plateaus, but observe that this drop-oﬀ is more rapid in the Social Influence Model. We
can understand this finding as follows: In the Social Influence Model, owing to neighborhood interactions zones
tend to form relatively quickly, and once formed tend to be dynamically robust, so that subsequent changes are
slow and relatively minimal, which explains the long plateaus seen in the le/f_t image of Figure 13. In contrast, in
the Axelrod model many more regions form initially which are more susceptible to subsequent changes com-
pared to zones, and hence the temporal evolution continues for a longer period of time, resulting in a more
gradual, steadier tapering oﬀ of disorder compared to the extended plateaus in the Social Influence Model.
This eﬀect is accentuated in the behavior of disorder metricρ2.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 20
Figure 14: The metricρ3 versus time (where time is expressed as a fraction of events occurring before the ab-
sorbing state is reached). Results are shown for the Social Influence Model and Axelrod Model, each averaged
over 100 runs on a30× 30 grid.
4.14A diﬀerent aspect of the system behavior is revealed by the geometrical metricρ3, shown in Figure 14. For both
models, the initial rapid rise ofρ3 from nearly zero is readily understood: When the system is initialized at the
start of the simulation, all agents are assigned random trait values, meaning that there will be a large number
of single-agent regions and zones (which are all perfectly square-shaped and smooth), and henceρ3 starts oﬀ
near zero. But as these regions and zones begin to interact, evolve, and merge, their shapes increasingly devi-
ate from that of a square (via some combination of either coarsening of their boundaries and/or elongation),
resulting in a growing value ofρ3. Following the initial rapid rise inρ3, observe that the Social Influence Model
plateaus whereas the Axelrod Model continues to steadily increase. This is consistent with the relatively rapid
formation of robust zones in the former, compared to predominance of susceptible-to-change regions in the
latter. An interesting new phenomena is revealed by metric ρ3 at the very end the simulations just before the
systems freeze into an absorbing state. In both models one sees a rapid drop in the value of the metric, indi-
cating that rough or filamentary regions and zones are being eliminated. However, this eﬀect is strikingly more
pronounced in the Axelrod Model (Figure 14). We can attribute this to the dominant-regions eﬀect, in which
small, non-compact regions are being quickly eaten by a large, dominant region; in the Social Influence Model
this occurs to a much lesser extent owing to the higher prevalence of zones (compared to regions). A comple-
mentary insight 4is that the Axelrod model can be viewed asF coupledQ-state voter models without surface
tension, whereas the interaction with the local field (all neighbors) in the Social Influence Model introduces sur-
face tension. This would be expected to produce rougher boundaries in the Axelrod case and smoother ones
in the Social Influence Model, which is consistent with the former’s higher peak value in Figure 14 prior to the
collapse.
Conclusions
5.1In conclusion, our model has allowed us to analyze the implications of local social influence in the dissemination
of culture across a society, and has unveiled some interesting features. Most notable is the overall amplification
of heterogeneity seen in the final absorbing state. In other words, the more one allows individual agents to be
influenced by other agents in their local environment, the less homogeneous the resulting society becomes.
The detailed, underlying mechanisms elucidated in this paper responsible for this counter-intuitive result can
be qualitatively understood, at least in part, as follows: While caring about your neighbor’s opinions will ini-
tially make you more likely to assimilate your views to theirs, once you do so your opinions will be less likely
to switch in the future since there is now a consensus belief in your local environment. In this manner, social
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 21
influence produces a hardening of opinions within local zones that are relatively robust to external influences.
However, as our simulations and analysis have revealed, the underlying dynamical mechanism responsible for
this amplification of heterogeneity is both rich and nuanced. As shown, it involves a competition between the
diﬀusion-based “dominant-regions” eﬀect that promotes homogeneity through the absorption of small regions
by larger ones, and a local social-influence eﬀect that makes cultural zones (even small ones) more robust to
infiltration by bordering regions. We remark that a related observation of enhancement of heterogeneity via
social influence was previously noted in an interesting model developed by Flache & Macy (2011). Although the
overall focus and implementation of neighborhood-based social influence in the model of Flache & Macy (2011)
diﬀers from the model studied here in multiple respects (e.g., the former incorporates selection error, “modal”
traits, cultural perturbations, and a diﬀerent social interaction scheme) – thereby making direct comparisons
somewhat diﬀicult – nonetheless there are strong parallels in the underlying mechanisms responsible for am-
plification of heterogeneity, suggesting that these social-influence-driven mechanisms must be fairly robust
and likely do not depend too strongly on the details of the model.
5.2Our analysis also sheds some modest new light on the inner dynamics of the original Axelrod Model, which in-
corporated the eﬀects of homophily and assimilation but not the eﬀects of collective local opinion as described
here. In particular, while Axelrod pointed out that a zone could eventually be penetrated by a far-away region
(through intermediary agents), and that there is a dominant-regions eﬀect whereby big regions “eat” neigh-
boring small regions, we have shown how the interplay between these two eﬀects plays a critical dynamical
role in the behavior of each model. In particular, in Axelrod’s model this interplay frequently leads to a conver-
gence to a purely homogeneous state, whereas this interplay is significantly weakened by the introduction of
a social influence factor into our model, making it diﬀicult for distant regions to break large zones, leading to
greater heterogeneity. Additionally, in our analysis we have numerically explored a two-dimensional version of
Axelrod’s qualitative, one-dimensional diﬀusion argument as the basis of the dominant-regions eﬀect. Lastly,
our findings relating to lattice size and boundary eﬀects (presented in greater detail in the Appendices below)
expand our understanding of Axelrod’s original work in this regard. In particular, Axelrod noted how boundary
eﬀects became progressively less important as lattice size increases. However, this proves not always to be the
case. In Figure 3, for instance, we noted how, in the Social Influence Model, the number of frozen zones ap-
pears to increase with lattice size (as opposed to the Axelrod model in which it saturates and then decreases).
However, if we were to remove the boundary walls of the lattice by imposing doubly periodic boundary con-
ditions (eﬀectively wrapping the grid into a torus), we observe that the number of frozen zones in the Social
Influence Model drops oﬀ significantly compared to the case with boundary walls (see Figure 16). This shows
how boundary eﬀects can still play an important role even in large systems.
5.3Finally, in this work we also developed three novel heterogeneity metrics which, in addition to providing di-
rect insights into the cultural dissemination process in our Social Influence Model and Axelrod’s original model,
also have potential utility across a broad spectrum of cultural dissemination models in general. The first of
these metrics examines the level of diﬀerence between neighboring agents; the second is an entropic measure
that takes account of the numbers and sizes of the distinct regions and computes the level of configurational
disorder in the system; the third provides direct information about the geometric qualities of the diﬀerent re-
gion/zone shapes and quantifies how filamentary and/or rough they are (vs. being geometrically compact and
smooth). This last metric, for example, revealed a previously unrecognized dynamical attribute of Axelrod’s
original model - the rapid dissolution, compactification, and/or smoothening of small zones in the final stages
of the cultural evolution - and also revealed how this eﬀect is mitigated by the action of local social influence.
Model Documentation
The model was built in Python. The code is available at this link: https://www.comses.net/codebases/
dda2d2ac-0cf9-46f6-a213-e0a9a30378ed/releases/1.0.0/ .
Appendix A: A remark on the eﬀect of the non-overlapping neighbors
Recall that in our model the social influence of an agent’s neighbors took the form of a switching probability
Qf
i,j as described in Equation 7. In this construction, we note that neighbors whose trait values diﬀered from
that of both the selected agent and the selected neighbored did not factor into the calculation of the switching
probability. The motivation for ignoring these “non-overlapping” neighbors was that they assumed the role of
third-party candidates whose own trait values were irrelevant when directly deciding between the trait values
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 22
σf
i andσf
j of the selected agent and neighbor. However, it is reasonable to consider the ramifications of includ-
ing the non-overlapping neighbors, since their presence indicates a greater diversity of views within that local
neighborhood, which in turn could conceivably enhance agenti’s willingness to switch its own trait values, at
least to a certain extent. We can model this by introducing a modified switching probabilityQ′f
i,j as follows:
Q′f
i,j =
Oi(σf
j ) + 1
2
[
|Ni|− Oi(σf
j )−Oi(σf
i )
]
Oi(σf
i ) +Oi(σf
j ) + 1
2
[
|Ni|− Oi(σf
j )−Oi(σf
i )
], (17)
where|Ni| is the total number of neighbors of agent i (including agenti itself),|Ni|− Oi(σf
j )−Oi(σf
i ) rep-
resents the number of non-overlapping neighbors, and 1
2 is a weighting factor. Comparing this with Equation
7, we see that this modified expression is similar in spirit to the original switching probability, except now the
non-overlapping neighbors (i.e., the bracketed terms in Equation 17) also exert a certain (albeit more limited)
degree of influence. Note in particular that if the weighting factor 1
2 were instead chosen to be 0, we would
recover the original switching probabilityQf
i,j described by Equation 7.
To explore the implications of this, we conducted a series of numerical simulations on the Social Influence
Model using this modified switching probability Q′f
i,j. We found that the inclusion of these non-overlapping
neighbors into the model yielded no significant qualitative changes in the model’s overall behavior. The only
quantitative diﬀerence was a modest reduction in number of frozen zones compared to our original Social Influ-
ence Model - a result which could be readily anticipated given thatQ′f
i,j≥Qf
i,j, meaning that the modification
to the switching probability eﬀectively reduces an agent’s resistance to change.
Figure 15: Number of frozen cultural zones versus lattice size (wherelatticesize = (width)2). 100 trials were
conducted for each lattice width from 2 to 22; 50 trials each for lattice widths from 24 to 40; and 20 trials for each
width from 50 to 100. All trials were conducted withF = 5 features andQ = 10 trait values, until an absorbing
state was reached.
Appendix B: A remark on boundary conditions
In our standard model, agents’ neighbors only include those individuals directly adjacent to them. Most agents,
being located in the interior of the lattice, will therefore have four immediate neighbors. However, agents along
the boundaries of the square lattice will have fewer neighbors with whom to directly interact (i.e., corner agents
only have two neighbors; agents on the boundary’s edge have three). Since boundary eﬀects are known to influ-
ence dynamical evolution in cultural dissemination models (Axelrod 1997; LaBerge et al. 2020), it is important to
understand, and potentially minimize, their impact. There are two natural means of mitigating such boundary
eﬀects. The first is to increase overall lattice size, which increases the proportion of interior agents to boundary
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 23
agents. The second is to impose doubly periodic boundary conditions on the square lattice, thereby turning the
square into a torus. While this latter method has the drawback of being topologically unrealistic, it nonethe-
less has two key virtues: uniformity, in that all agents have precisely four neighbors with whom to interact, and
ease of numerical implementation, since it does not require using progressively larger lattice sizes. We examine
both cases - varying both lattice size and boundary type (periodic vs. non-periodic) for both the Social Influence
Model and Axelrod model. Results are illustrated in Figure 16.
Figure 16: Average number of frozen zones in the absorbing state versus lattice size (wherelattice size =
(width)2). 100 simulations were performed for each width in the range 2 to 22, 50 simulations for widths from
24 to 40, and 20 simulations for a width of 50.0.
It is clear that in both the Social Influence Model and Axelrod Model the presence of fixed (square) boundaries
enhances the formation of frozen zones - when these boundaries are removed through the introduction of pe-
riodic boundary conditions the number of frozen zones drops in both cases. This is as expected, since previous
studies have elucidated the mechanism by which boundaries can increase heterogeneity (Axelrod 1997; LaBerge
et al. 2020). More interesting is the overall behavior of the Social Influence Model with fixed boundary condi-
tions versus periodic boundary conditions. Here we see that although the presence of periodic boundary con-
ditions significantly curtails the growth in the number of frozen zones, nonetheless the total number of frozen
zones in the periodic boundary case continues to slowly increase with lattice size (unlike the Axelrod model).
We can understand this as follows: As argued earlier (see Section “Heterogeneity and Lattice Size”), although
the dominant-regions eﬀect for large lattice sizes is in operation in both the Social Influence Model and Axelrod
model, in the former model the agents in more distant regions are less able to propagate their cultural traits in
order to break zones. The resulting robustness of zones leads to a higher total number of frozen zones in the
absorbing state. Hence, for the Social Influence Model with fixed boundaries, the number of frozen zones will
increase with lattice size. With periodic boundaries, the same general phenomena is occurring, but now the
dominant-regions eﬀect is enhanced by the lack of boundaries because large regions are now free to expand in
all directions, no longer being confined by rigid boundary walls. However, while this lowers the overall number
of frozen zones compared to the rigid boundary case, it is still not suﬀicient to prevent an overall increase in the
number of frozen zones with increasing with lattice size since distant regions still cannot propagate their traits
eﬀiciently enough to break zones.
Appendix C: Order-disorder phase transition
In Figure 3, we directly compared lattice-size eﬀects in the Axelrod and Social Influence models for the same
parameter values (F = 5 andQ = 10 ) and noted qualitatively distinct behaviors. It is known from the work
of Castellano et al. (2000) and Klemm et al. (2003) that certain cultural dissemination models are capable of
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 24
exhibiting order-disorder phase transitions. In particular, Castellano et al. (2000) showed that in the Axelrod
model there is a first-order, discontinuous phase transition wheneverF >2. Although somewhat peripheral to
our main study, we numerically reproduce here this phase transition (for the caseF = 5) for the Axelrod Model,
and then directly compare its behavior to that of the Social Influence Model taken at the same parameter value
F = 5. Our results are shown in Figure 17. As seen from the figure, for the Axelrod model there is a discontinuous
transition in the limit of large system size, wherein for small numbers of traits Q the absorbing state is in an
“ordered” phase in which there is a single, dominant frozen zone that subsumes most of the lattice, while in the
disordered phase (higherQ) no such dominant frozen zone exists. In contrast, for the Social Influence Model at
F = 5 there does not exist a corresponding discontinous (first-order) transition. Importantly, for purposes of
our investigation, we intentionally always make the direct comparison between the two models’ behaviors at
the same parameter values so as to isolate the eﬀects of the social influence factor under the same conditions
(since our focus is on analyzing the dynamical processes leading to zonal formation in the two models when
their underlying structure (F,Q ) is identical). And as noted previously, at (F,Q ) = (5, 10) we see from Figure
3 an intrinsic diﬀerence between the two models in the growth in the overall numbers of frozen zones with
lattice size (associated with the presence/absence of a social influence factor), as explained by the mechanisms
described in Section 3.7. Nonetheless, an ancillary yet highly interesting issue (albeit outside the scope of the
present work) remains – namely, whether or not the Social Influence Model can also display discontinuous
phase transitions at other parameter choices, and moreover, whether it might be possible to somehow map the
Social Influence Model onto the Axelrod Model by appropriately rescaling the parameter values (which in turn
might perhaps even allow one to identify certain universal features common to both models, such as scaling
exponents). This is le/f_t for future investigation.
Figure 17: 50 trials were conducted for each lattice width of 30 by 30. All trials were conducted withF = 5
features, until an absorbing state was reached. The x-axis is the number of traits per feature while the y-axis is
the ratio of the size of the largest frozen region in the absorbing state to the total size of the grid (e.g., 900).
Appendix D: Increase in neighborhood size
In the Axelrod Model, it is known that an increase in neighborhood size tends to decrease the overall number of
frozen regions. The introduction of a social-influence factor into the model would not be expected to alter the
mechanism responsible for this behavior. As a test, we increased the neighborhood size from four to twelve in
the models and reproduced Figure 3; see Figure 18. Although we see the expected decrease in overall numbers
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 25
of frozen zones, the same qualitative trends prevailed.
Figure 19 shows the distribution of zone sizes for the original neighborhood size (4) and the expanded neighbor-
hood size (12). For the expanded neighborhood, observe that there are fewer frozen zones per run on average
compared to the smaller neighborhood. Moreover, an expanded neighborhood leads to a higher occurrence of
moderate-size zones (e.g., of sizes 20-200).
Figure 18: Average number of frozen zones in the absorbing state versus lattice size (wherelattice size =
(width)2). 100 simulations were performed for each width in the range 2 to 22, 50 simulations for widths from
24 to 30.
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 26
Figure 19: Neighborhood Size Eﬀects. Frozen zone sizes versus number of occurrences for the Social Influence
Model with neighborhood sizes of 4 (le/f_t) and 12 (right). Data is for a30×30 grid with 5 features and 10 traits per
feature, and is averaged over 100 runs for neighborhood size 4, and over 50 runs for neighborhood size 12. The
average number of frozen zones is 8.0 for the smaller neighborhood size and 6.7 for the larger neighborhood
size. However, as neighborhood size increases and diversity decreases, the occurrences of moderate-size zones
(e.g., sizes 20-200) increases.
Appendix E: Amplification of heterogeneity in other models with Social
influence
In our Social Influence Model we observed (see Figures 3 and 6) a marked increase in diversity compared to
the original Axelrod model owing to the introduction of a neighborhood-based social-influence factor into our
model. It is interesting to test how sensitive this finding is to the details of the particular social-influence factor
we used. Towards this end, we numerically examined the corresponding behavior in an earlier social-influence-
type model first studied by Flache & Macy (2011). In order to make this comparison, we first stripped down the
Flache & Macy (2011) model by removing a perturbative component in the model that allowed it to evolve in-
definitely. By removing this component, an absorbing state can be reached and the number of frozen zones
counted.Flache & Macy (2011) anticipated that there should be an increase in heterogeneity associated with
their social-influence factor. We confirmed this finding - see Figure 20 - but observed some features which war-
rant discussion. Most notably, a comparison of Figure 20 with Figure 3 shows that the while both models ex-
hibit similar qualitative amplification of heterogeneity with lattice size, the actual number of frozen zones in
the Flache & Macy (2011) model is manyfold larger. We believe this can be traced to an essential diﬀerence in
how social influence is incorporated into each model. In our Social Influence Model, the algorithm is such that
the system will always evolve into an absorbing state in which the agents in a given frozen zone never share any
trait values in common with agents in a neighboring frozen zone. However, in the Flache & Macy (2011) scheme,
the social-influence algorithm employed uses a type of minimum-threshold update rule. This in turn means
that once an absorbing state is reached, it is possible that the agents in one frozen zone may still have a trait
value for a given feature which is the same at that of an agent in an adjacent frozen zone. Owing to this possi-
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 27
bility of ‘trait overlap’ between frozen zones, the resulting total number of frozen zones in this case is notably
larger than in the Social Influence Model. Despite these quantitative diﬀerences, however, we emphasize that
both social-influence schemes produce an increase in diversity with lattice size, suggesting that despite quan-
titative diﬀerences, the underlying qualitative mechanism promoting diversification operates similarly in both
systems.
Figure 20: Number of frozen cultural zones versus lattice size (wherelatticesize = (width)2) for a stripped-
down version of a model introduced by Flache et al. (2011). 100 trials were conducted for each lattice width from
2 to 22; 50 trials each for lattice widths from 24 to 40; and 20 trials for lattice width 50. All trials were conducted
withF = 5 features andQ = 10 trait values, until an absorbing state was reached.
Appendix F: Lattice size eﬀects for other parameter choices
As noted in Table 2, there is an overall amplification of diversity associated with social influence for a variety of
diﬀerent parameter(F,Q ) choices in comparison to the Axelrod Model (save for parameter choices producing
a monocultural absorbing state). Figure 3 in the main paper, taken at(F,Q ) = (5, 10), illustrates the interplay
between amplification and lattice size. Figure 21 illustrates analogous behavior at a diﬀerent parameter choice,
(F,Q ) = (7, 15).
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 28
Figure 21: Number of frozen cultural zones versus lattice size. 100 trials were conducted for each lattice width
from 2 to 22; 50 trials each for lattice widths from 24 to 40; and 20 trials for lattice width 50. Orange and blue
trials were conducted withF = 5 features andQ = 10 trait values while gray and yellow trials were conducted
withF = 7 features andQ = 15, until an absorbing state was reached.
Notes
1The definitions of cultural regions and zones used here arenot the same as those used in Axelrod’s original
work (Axelrod 1997)
2Guided by the average number of events to reach the absorbing state.
3Fortunately, this kind of scenario occurs fairly frequently in our simulations, particularly once the system
settles into an absorbing state.
4We thank an anonymous referee for this insight.
References
Abelson, R. (1964). Mathematical models of the distribution of attitudes under controversy. In N. Frederiksen &
H. Gulliksen (Eds.), Contributions to Mathematical Psychology. New York, NY: Rinehart Winston
Anderson, B. (1991).Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. New York, NY:
Verso Books
Axelrod, R. (1997). The dissemination of culture: A model with local convergence and global polarization.Jour-
nal of Conflict Resolution, 41(2), 203–226
Axelrod, R. (2006). Agent-based modelling as a bridge between disciplines. In L. Tesfatsion & K. L. Judd (Eds.),
Handbook of Computational Economics: Agent-Based Computational Economics, vol. 2, (pp. 1565–1584). Am-
sterdam: North Holland
Axelrod, R. & Bennett, S. D. (1993). A landscape theory of aggregation.British Journal of Political Science, 23(2),
211–233
Ballas, D., Clarke, G. & Wiemers, E. (2005). Building a dynamic spatial microsimulation model for ireland.Pop-
ulation, Space and Place, 11(3), 157–172
Barros, J. (2012). Exploring urban dynamics in Latin American cities using an agent-based modelling approach.
In A. Heppenstall, A. Crooks, L. See & M. Batty (Eds.), Agent-Based Models of Geographical Systems, (pp. 571–
589). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 29
Castellano, C., Fortunato, S. & Loreto, V. (2009). Statistical physics of social dynamics.Review of Modern Physics,
81(591)
Castellano, C., Marsili, M. & Vespignani, A. (2000). Nonequilibrium phase transition in a model for social influ-
ence. Physical Review Letters, 85(16), 3536–3539
Daley, D. J. & Kendall, D. G. (1964). Epidemics and rumors.Nature, 204(1118)
Deﬀuant, G., Neau, D., Amblard, F. & Weisbuch, G. (2000). Mixing beliefs among interacting agents.Advances in
Complex Systems, 3(1), 87–98
Flache, A. & Macy, M. W. (2011). Local convergence and global diversity: From interpersonal to social influence.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 55(6)
Friedkin, N. & Johnsen, E. (2011).Social Influence Network Theory: A Sociological Examination of Small Group
Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Gandica, Y., Medina, E. & I., B. (2013). A thermodynamic counterpart of the Axelrod model of social influence:
The one-dimensional case. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 392(24), 6561–6570
Hegselmann, R. & Krause, U. (2002). Opinion dynamics and bounded confidence.Journal of Artifical Societies
and Social Simulation, 5(3), 2
Heppenstall, A. J., Evans, A. J. & Birkin, M. H. (2006). Using hybrid agent-based systems to model spatially-
influenced retail markets. Journal of Artifical Societies and Social Simulation, 3(9), 2
Jaynes, E. T . (1978). Where do we stand on maximum entropy? In R. D. Rosenkrantz (Ed.),E. T . Jaynes: Papers
on Probability, Statistics and Statistical Physics. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer
Keijzer, M. (2018). Communication in online social networks fosters cultural isolation.Complexity, 2018
Klemm, K., Eguíluz, V. M., Toral, R. & San Miguel, M. (2003). Global culture: A noise-induced transition in finite
systems. Physical Review E, 67(045101)
Kohler, T ., Kresl, J., Van Wes, Q., Carr, E. & Wilshusen, R. (2000). Be there then: A modeling approach to settle-
ment determinants and spatial eﬀiciency among late ancestral Pueblo populations of the Mesa Verde Region,
U.S. Southwest. In T . A. Kohler & G. J. Gumerman (Eds.), Dynamics in Human and Primate Societies: Agent-
Based Modeling of Social and Spatial Processes. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Kuperman, M. N. (2006). Cultural propagation on social networks.Physical Review E, 73(4)
LaBerge, N., Chaderjian, A., Ginelli, V., Jebsen, M. & Landsberg, A. (2020). Modeling cultural dissemination and
divergence between rural and urban regions. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 23(4), 3
Parisi, D., Cecconi, F. & Natale, F. (2003). Cultural change in spatial environments: The role of cultural assimila-
tion and internal changes in cultures. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 47(2), 163–179
Peres, L. R. & Fontanari, J. F. (2012). Eﬀect of external fields in Axelrod’s model of social dynamics.Physical
Review E, 86(031131)
Pfau, J., Kirley, M. & Kashima, Y. (2013). The Co-evolution of cultures, social network communities, and agent
locations in an extension of Axelrod’s model of cultural dissemination. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and
its Applications, 392(2), 381–391
Reia, S. M. & Fontanari, J. F. (2016). Eﬀect of long-range interactions on the phase transition of Axelrod’s model.
Physical Review E, 94(052149)
Rodríguez, A., del Castillo, M. & Vázquez, G. J. (2009). Induced monoculture in Axelrod model with clever mass
media. International Journal of Modern Physics C, 20(8), 1233–1245
Schelling, T . C. (1971). Dynamic models of segregation.Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1, 143–186
Shibanai, Y., Yasuno, S. & Ishiguro, I. (2001). Eﬀects of global information feedback on diversity: Extensions to
Axelrod’s adaptive culture model. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 45(1), 80–96
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633
PAGE 30
Stivala, A. & Keeler, P . (2016). Another phase transition in the Axelrod model. arXiv preprint. Available at:https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1612.02537
Toﬀoli, T . & Margolus, N. (1987).Cellular Automata Machines: A New Environment for Modeling. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press
Vazquez, F., Castelló, X. & San Miguel, M. (2010). Agent based models of language competition: Macroscopic
descriptions and order-disorder transitions. Journal of Statistical Mechanics Theory and Experiment, 2010(4),
P04007
JASSS, 24(4) 5, 2021 http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/24/4/5.htmlDoi: 10.18564/jasss.4633